Chris Bishop

**IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF
TENNESSEE**

\
\

  ---------------------------------- -------
  **Rebekah Fitzgerald,**            **)**
                                     
  **Plaintiff,**                     **)**
                                     
  **vs.**                            **)**
                                     
  **Victory Mountain High School**   **)**
                                     
  **and**                            **)**
                                     
  **David Jacobson,**                **)**
                                     
  **Defendants**                     **)**
                                     
                                     **)**
                                     
                                     **)**
                                     
                                     **)**
  ---------------------------------- -------

**Civil Action No. CV-15-12345**

\
\

**Memorandum in Support of Defendants’ Motion for Summary Judgment\
**\
\

\
\

**Statement of the Case**

****Plaintiff Fitzgerald has filed a § 1983 claim against Defendants
Victory Mountain High School ("VMHS") and David Jacobson. Fitzgerald
alleges that the Defendants infringed upon her First Amendment rights
because she wished to submit an article for publication in the school’s
newspaper but did not because she feared punishment for violating a VMHS
student conduct policy. Defendants move for summary judgment because the
Plaintiff voluntarily chilled her own speech and, therefore, did not
suffer the injury in fact required to establish standing. Additionally,
if standing were to be found, the school newspaper is not a public
forum. Consequently, school officials may impose reasonable restrictions
on student speech without violating the students' First Amendment
rights.

\
\

**Facts**

Plaintiff Fitzgerald is a senior at VMHS and a student in Defendant
Jacobson’s journalism class. Fitzgerald Dep. 1:16-23. The journalism
class is an elective course that helps put together the school newspaper
“The Mountain.” *Id.* 1:26-27. Students in the class research, write,
and edit articles and postings that are eventually published in the
paper. *Id.* Before being allowed to participate in the journalism class
students are required to read and sign an acknowledgement form that
states, “the faculty advisor for the newspaper is the ultimate
decision-maker as to what articles are researched and published.” *Id.*
2:20-24. “The Mountain” is funded entirely by the VMHS and the school
does not seek nor receive any outside advertising fees or funding.
Jacobson Aff. ¶ 7. The newspaper is published for student-use only and
distributed only at the school. *Id.*

Early in the school year VMHS sponsored a voluntary sex education
program for students. Fitzgerald Dep. 3:1-3. The program taught students
about abstinence, birth control, and sexually transmitted diseases.
Chang Aff. ¶ 6. Defendant Jacobson’s journalism class considered writing
an article discussing the sex education program but ultimately decided
to write about the school’s football team instead. Jacobson Aff. ¶ 9.

Plaintiff Fitzgerald had strong views opposing the sex education
program, and pre-marital sex in general. Fitzgerald Dep. 3:8-11. She
wished to write an article for “The Mountain” expressing her opinions
about the program and pre-marital sex. *Id.* 3:15-16. However, Plaintiff
Fitzgerald ultimately decided not research or write an article because
she feared she might be punished for violating VMHS Student Code of
Conduct 45, a policy which prohibits students from using language that
may “insult, demean, or criticize” other students or teachers. *Id.*
3:23-27.

Plaintiff Fitzgerald never discussed her desire to write an article with
any of the students or staff at VMHS. *Id.* 4:1-27. No one at the school
knew that she wanted to write such an article. No one at VMHS
discouraged, threatened, or punished Plaintiff Fitzgerald because of the
article. *Id.* Plaintiff Fitzgerald remained in the journalism class for
the duration of the semester and earned a grade of A-. *Id.* 5:3.

**Argument**

The court should grant the Defendants’ motion for summary judgment.
Summary judgment is proper “if the movant shows that there is no genuine
dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment
as a matter of law.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a). The substantive law
identifies which facts are material, and only a dispute “over facts that
might affect the outcome of the suit under the governing law will
properly preclude the entry of summary judgment.” *Anderson v. Liberty
Lobby, Inc.*, 477 U.S. 242, 248 (1986). Moreover, a dispute over facts
is genuine only “if the evidence is such that a reasonable jury could
return a verdict for the nonmoving party.” Id. A movant satisfies its
burden by showing “that there is an absence of evidence to support the
nonmoving party’s case.” *Celotex Corp. v. Catrett*, 477 U.S. 317, 325
(1986).

Defendants satisfy their burden because the undisputed summary judgment
evidence shows that the Plaintiff voluntarily chilled her own speech
and, therefore, did not suffer the injury in fact required to establish
standing. Furthermore, even if standing were to be found, the school
newspaper, The Mountain, is not a public forum. Consequently, school
officials may impose reasonable restrictions on student speech without
violating the student's First Amendment rights.

**I. Plaintiff lacks standing to assert a First Amendment violation
because she subjectively chilled her own speech and, therefore, did not
sustain an injury in fact.**

****In order to establish Article III, constitutional standing, a
plaintiff must show that she has suffered an injury in fact that is
traceable to the Defendant.*McGlone v. Bell*, 681 F.3d 718, 729 (6th
Cir. 2012). This injury in fact must be both “concrete and
particularized” and “actual or imminent, not conjectural or
hypothetical." *Id.* at 729. With respect to the standing of First
Amendment litigants, "[a]llegations of a subjective ‘chill’ are not an
adequate substitute for a claim of specific present objective harm or a
threat of specific future harm.” *Morrison v. Bd. of Educ. of Boyd
Cty.*, 521 F.3d 602, 608 (6th Cir. 2008).

For example, in *Morrison,* a high school student alleged that a school
policy prohibiting students from making harassing or derogatory
statements to other students based on their sexual orientation chilled
his speech. *Id.* at 605. The student believed that his religion
required him to tell homosexual students that their sexual orientation
was a sin. *Id.* The Sixth Circuit held that the student did not have
standing to bring his claim because he had not suffered an injury in
fact. *Id.* at 608. The court emphasized that the student’s claim was
based solely on the apprehension of punishment and lacked any specific
action by the administration that supported his fear. *Id*.

\

Conversely, when a plaintiff can show some action by the defendant that
has objectively chilled his speech, standing should be found. For
example, in *McGlone v. Bell* a professing evangelical Christian was
told that he must obtain a waiver before he would be allowed to speak on
a college campus. *McGlone,* 681 F.3d at 723. The plaintiff applied for,
and was denied the waiver, and afterwards he "was approached by a campus
police officer who threatened to arrest him for trespass if he did not
stop speaking and leave the campus." *Id.*at 730. The court found
that**the plaintiff did have standing because the chill of his speech
was based on more than a subjective fear of punishment. *Id.*at 730. The
court emphasized that the plaintiff "is alleging more than the
apprehension based on a written policy” *Id.* Rather, there was enough
evidence to show that the actions of the defendant objectively chilled
his speech. *Id.*

In the present case, even when the facts are viewed in the Plaintiff’s
favor, the undisputed summary judgment evidence shows that the Plaintiff
subjectively chilled her own speech and, therefore, did not sustain the
injury in fact necessary to establish standing. Although the Plaintiff
Fitzgerald desired to write an article for the school newspaper
expressing her views opposing premarital sex, she did not express this
desire to Defendant Jacobson or anyone else at Victory Mountain High
School. Fitzgerald Dep. 3:21-24. As in *Morrison*, Fitzgerald
subjectively feared that writing such an article would violate the VMHS
Student Code of Conduct Policy 45 and result in punishment. Fitzgerald
Dep. 3:26-27. However, no one at VMHS ever knew that Fitzgerald wanted
to write the article, and no one at VHMS ever discouraged, threatened,
or warned Fitzgerald not to write an article regarding sex education or
premarital sex.**Fitzgerald Dep. 4:4-23. Therefore, unlike in *McGlone*,
there is no action by the Defendants that objectively chilled
Fitzgerald’s speech.

Therefore, like the plaintiff in *Morrison,* Fitzgerald's claim is based
solely on the apprehension of punishment and lacks any specific action
by the Defendants that support her fear. Like in *Morrison,* Fitzgerald
subjectively chilled her own speech and suffered no concrete harm. As
such, Plaintiff Fitzgerald does not have standing to bring this action
because she experienced no injury in fact.

**II. Even if Plaintiff has standing there has been no First Amendment
violation because the school paper is a non public forum and school
officials may impose reasonable restrictions on the speech of students
in a non public forum.**

"First Amendment rights of students in the public schools are not
automatically coextensive with the rights of adults in other settings,
and must be applied in light of the special characteristics of the
school environment." *Hazelwood Sch. Dist. v. Kuhlmeier*, 484 U.S. 260,
260 (1988). If a school facility has not been characterized as a forum
for public expression, "school officials may impose reasonable
restrictions on the speech of students, teachers, and other members of
the school community." *Id.* at 267.

"[S]chool facilities may be deemed to be public forums only if school
authorities have “by policy or by practice” opened those facilities “for
indiscriminate use by the general public" *Id.* at 261. When it comes to
school papers, the Supreme Court has held that no public forum has been
created if the paper is intended "as a supervised learning experience
for journalism students." *Id.* at 270. Specifically, the Court has
emphasized that if the paper is "part of the educational curriculum and
a regular classroom activity under the journalism teacher's control" it
cannot be considered a public forum. *Id.* at 261 (holding that a school
paper that was produced by a journalism class, taken for school credit,
and part of a regular classroom activity was not a public forum). If a
school paper is considered a non public forum "[e]ducators do not offend
the First Amendment by exercising editorial control over the style and
content of student speech . . . so long as their actions are reasonably
related to legitimate pedagogical concerns." *Id.* at 261.

In this case, it is clear that “The Mountain” is a non public forum.
“The Mountain” is a school-funded newspaper that does not receive any
outside funding. Jacobson Aff. ¶ 7. The newspaper is published for
student-use only and distributed only at school: there is no circulation
of the paper outside of VMHS. *Id.* The paper is published by Defendant
Jacobson's journalism class as a way to promote student involvement in
practical journalism. Fitzgerald Dep. 2:19-20. Before being allowed to
participate in the journalism class students are required to sign an
acknowledgement for that states, "the faculty advisor for the newspaper
is the ultimate decision-maker as to what articles are researched and
published." Fitzgerald Dep. 2:5-22. As such, there is no indication that
Defendant Jacobson or VMHS intended for The Mountain to be anything more
than a "supervised learning experience for journalism students."

Since The Mountain is a non public forum, Defendants Jacobson and VMHS
are able to exercise editorial control over the style and content of
student speech so long as their actions are reasonably related to
legitimate concerns. Protecting students and teachers from insulting or
harassing language is certainly a legitimate concern. Therefore, had
Plaintiff Fitzgerald chosen to write and submit her article for
publication, the Defendants could have chosen to refuse to publish it if
they believed that the article insulted, demeaned, stigmatized,
criticized, or harassed another student or teacher.

**Conclusion**

The undisputed evidence shows that Plaintiff Fitzgerald chilled her own
speech and, therefore, does not have standing to bring this case.
Furthermore, “The Mountain” is a non public forum and consequently, even
if Plaintiff Fitzgerald had submitted her article for publication the
Defendants could have refused to publish it without violating
Plaintiff’s First Amendment rights.

For all of the foregoing reasons, the Defendants respectfully request
that this court grant their motion for summary judgment.

\
\

\
\

Word Count: 1961

9

\

